# What Color is Int

Well I will get to the tile of this post in a minute, but let me back up and give some background from where I am coming from with a short story. 

In school I have been learning this programming language called Python which some of you have heard of. Any way its syntactically different than the language I am more used to called Swift. Not well known and despised by many because of the company paying the bill for it. In most programming languages for better or worst you have the ability to add a comment next to the syntax of the program "Code" that you are working on and this tells the compiler/interpreter to ignore this section of the text file. There are dedicated characters to do so. In Swift and most C syntax style programming language like Javascript, C#, C++ you use the symbol `//`. Well I was working on my algorism homework with some friends late at night and for some reason I decided Python was the language I would use for this class. Well Python has many different Syntax choices one of them is how comments are started. Specially with a `#` which to me is annoying because now to get the computer to do the same thing as another language that my muscle memory defaults to. I have to do a context switch and remember. Fortunately some text editors can do this for you with the use of a shortcut or hot key (many more thoughts on this for another time). Well as it was 11pm and I was very tired and we were using an "Algorithm" called binary search (Algorithm's emphasized because in my limited experience normal people with normal problems, talk about it with the same expression or emotion the same way they talk about AI). Which I will not explain today. But any way part of this algorithm finds the mid point between two numbers by adding them up and dividing by 2 but actually doing what is called a floor division or rounding down. Well because programmers try to be lazy when they can, Python has a syntactic short cut for this also called syntactic sugar. Which is represented with `//`. Well my sleep deprived self made the comment out loud with out thinking much of it. "Look guys comments are really just floor division". Well we ended up laughing about this for a good five to ten minutes. 

This funny example of what I like to call a personal Type conflict, and got me thinking again about something I have been thinking about for roughly two years. That is how do you build a structural program editor (working idea), and I thought this is a good example how how little the syntax of a programming language actually matters compared to what information the compiler actually needs to know in order to arrange some amount of 1s and 0s in the right way to express the meaning of the of program. To clarify for those less familiar with a compiler often does. The first step is usually to tokenize and parse the syntax of the files (1s and 0s in the computer) that the syntax of the language was written into. So why not skip that step and just write the information need to express or rebuild what is called the Abstract Syntax Tree or AST directly to the file (many ways of doing this) and just pass that to the compiler. Once we can do that well how many different ways can you create or modify that data structure and what does the User interface or user experience of that program look like? Traditional Text files and countless key presses, maybe something else? Well programming langues have a finite amount of things you can actually put in a text file that will compile let alone run as a program. So given a certain position in a program how many different changes can you actually make for a given language context?

From my limited experience and developers or how ever they identify, no one likes writing parser programs and almost go out of there way to use another abstraction/program to do so for them. Well anyone who has done a decent amount of programming knows that the syntax of a language eventually falls away especially when you are comfortable or in another words fluent in the language you are writing in. Meaning you don't have to think about the syntax and your fingers more or less have the muscle memory needed to put together the structures and control flow that you wanna build. Or at-least play around with different representations of the control flow and data structures.

Now lets finally get to the title of this post. Given this fairytale program where we can interact and view programs in many different ways as we are all different and have different preferences as how we like to see data in our own devices (light and dark mode is the simplest example here). Well how do we draw this crazy graph structure on the screen? Can this be done on a 2d screen? Does it need to be done with the new AR/VR hardware? If language we are projecting  has Types how do you visually differentiate types. Text? well thats boring and a lot of typing and naming things is often hard. Colors well thats interesting and kinda artistic in a weird way. Well if all types have a color? What color is an Int?